IUD Pregnancies
Project 1 for Columbia University Lede Program

Aim: To visualize the amount of females in the United States who become pregnant every year due especially to IUD failure and more widely from birth control method failure.

Findings - there are 3.6 million women who become pregnant unexpectedly in the United States every year and 20,000 women who become pregnant despite their IUD.  I thought visualizing this in terms of the individuals who will have an unintended failure due to method failure would be a new perspective than the .1% people most associate with pregnancy risk on IUDs. With Roe vs Wade repealed and increasily more restraints on access to abortion, getting pregnant will become an even bigger nightmare to those whose choices are limited, and socio-economic status and where you live will increasingly determine access to abortion. While increased contraceptive access and education would make the biggest impact in limiting women who face this situation - there are always going to be failures that result in pregnancy. 

So not to scare people from the most effective form of birth control I wanted to compare this with birth control pills' effectiveness and condoms' effectiveness, and no birth control.

Data Collection: Data at present largely stems from the 2017-2019 National Survey of Family Growth (NSFG) which is undertaken by the CDC. This data was removed from its web-based interactive CodeBook and instead accessible as a pdf. I used two of the survey's three codebooks, one focussed on pregnancies and one on female contraception. I took the tables and created my own CSV file. This is the most recent published data - but I am excited for the next iteration's publication given the exciting data it contains and massively large sample size for research of this nature. I also created a csv of the different failure rates of IUDs from each of their respective clinical trails. I focussed on cumulative risk bc I did not understand the Pearl Index of yearly risk. So graph represents risk over time. Thirdly I created a map of which US states given the overall rate of unplanned pregnancy would be the most overwhelmed by their in-state demand for birth control. I found this analysis the most satisfying as it could be helpful for people to know if they are booking an airline ticket to fly out of state for their abortion. (tl;dr GO TO MAINE FOR YOUR ABORTION)

Overviews of analysis:

I was initially most interested in the Pregnancy codebook variable tables titled: WHATMETH(01-05)- what method of birth control people were on in the months prior to pregnancy; WHYPRG - which showed among those with unwanted/unintended pregnancies, who answered improper bc use, bc failure or no bc was behind pregnancy; and whynopg1 variables - detailing why the respondent was not on bc. What confused me the most was how I could untangle statistics from recent pregnancies from pregancies that occured decades ago, when IUDs were a totally different beast (the earliest pregnancy captured by the data occurred in 1967). On one hand you have the 127 respondents who said their birth control method failed and had unwanted/unintended pregnancies (WHYPRG) but unfortunately that doesn’t detail which birth control method and on the other you have all the reported pregnancies regardless of wantedness with WHATMETH(01-05) that has better detail on what method failed, however that encompassed many historic pregnancies so IUD failure rate appeared to be .3% far lower than it actually is because it was a historically uncommon method due to safety concerns.

Instead I decided to use the NSFG survey of 6141 women for their contraception decisions and not the 10215 survey of women on their pregnancies. Then assuming this was reflective of the entire population of 72.2 million females between the age 15 and 49 in the United States, how many would fall pregnant due to their IUD's failure (there is a slight descrepancy between copper and hormonal IUDs but visually separating them in the context of all birth controls did not make sense. To compare different IUDS I charted their failure rates according to the cumulative risk over the years that they are approved for use. Luckily my end result of 5% overall matches a statistic reported from the Guttmacher Institute, so I felt confident it was OK.  

Things I would have liked to try: Details on the location of pregnant women from the NSFG codebook was unavailable for reason of privacy but I wished I could have accessed them to see how choices and methods differ state-to-state and longer-term how an abortion ban will impact unplanned pregnancy outcomes. Race data was also not accessible in the pdf Codebook, which is frustrating because I saw some really impactful analysis showing Black women were far more likely to have unwanted pregnancies and rely on condoms as birth control, while IUDs were nearly equal across Hispanic, Black and White populations. The pill was disproportionately used by white women. [Perhaps this is something I can FOIA in future]

New Skills: Reading the detailed descriptions of what each variable meant in terms of survey questions was really good practice. Then making sure the data made sense, deciding it did not and then realizing it was due to the inclusion of very historical pregancies also felt like a worthwhile experience. I also learned new skills in trying to first test out what charts I wanted to make in pandas. Looping through columns with an if lambda statement to graph a table littered with NaN variables; using loc and .drop to combine and omit columns, and trying iloc(with no success) were all new coding skills I for the most part learned successfully (not you iloc). Using a pdf to csv converter. Creating a choropleth, using Figma and its Iconify plug-in were all useful skills, especially when Datawrapper would not connect my data points with a line! Also what I thought was a lazy choice to use someone's html code has actually proved an incredible learning tool and I now feel v proficient in html.


